Dr. Richardson? You came well, sir. Who are you?
Okay. My name is Herbert H. Richardson.
Born in Lynn, Massachusetts, in 1930, September
24, 1930.
Shortly after I was born, family moved to Maine to a
small town called Bridgeton. Bridgeton.
Bridgeton. About, at that time, 3,000 people.
Where is Bridgeton? Population. Bridgeton is
approximately 40 miles north of Portland. Okay.
It's near the Sebago Lake region. We spent a week or
two there. I really enjoyed it. The people were
nice. It's very pretty up there in Paul.
My father started out as a blacksmith and a
mechanic, and then
later on when automobiles began to come in and and
so on, he got into the machine trades. Actually
lived in the small town of Bridgeton early in his
career. Moved to Massachusetts, where he worked
in the Navy Yard on submarines and other precision
devices used during the war. and continued in that
kind of work until after I was born, and that was
during the Depression. There was not a very good
situation down there, so that led him to move with
the family back to Maine, where he started a small
business doing welding and blacksmith work and
machine work. Eventually developed that into a
very thriving business designing and building
snow plows. It was a good market for snow plows.
Motorized on a tractor type device or just the plow
itself? Mounted on a truck. Developed one of the
first hydraulic systems for positioning the plow
and the wings that it used to set back snow banks at
the side of the road. Did he patent those? He had
some patents on hydraulic systems.
So anyways, I grew up, he wanted me to be an engineer
and wanted me to take over the business. So by the
time I was eight years old, I was working in the
business operating machine tools. I had to have a
bench to stand on so I could reach the controls. I
learned welding, machining, all those kinds of
things. I did work in the business part-time all
the way through high school. During the time that
my father lived in Massachusetts, he worked in a in
a machine shop called Olmsted and Flint Company,
which is located in Cambridge, adjacent to the MIT
campus. And he got acquainted with a large number
of MIT students. They used to come over and watch
him work and shop. And so he developed an
aspiration for me to go to MIT. and become an
engineer. Well, the high school that I went to had a
total of about 200 students. And no one from that
school had ever gone out of state to college. And
most did not go to college in state. At any rate, I
ended up deciding I did not want to be an engineer.
but wanted to go into physics. And so I applied and
was accepted to Colby College, a very high quality
liberal arts school. Went there against the
advice of the high school principal, who told me
that I probably wouldn't make it there and should
go to the University of Maine. So I went to Colby and
had kind of a kind of a hard time because my
preparation in high school wasn't very good. But I
ended the first semester with a perfect record and
found out that physics wasn't quite what I wanted
to do and that maybe the old man was right. And so I
went down to Cambridge and applied to MIT. At the
end of the year, I had a perfect day record at Colby,
so there was no question about being admitted. And
that's how I started my MIT career.
When year
is that, roughly? It was 1948 was when I started at
Colby and at 49. And I
really liked it there at the Institute. I did major
in mechanical engineering. Mechanical
engineering was the next question. What did you
think you would be doing as a mechanical engineer?
Railroad work at that time? No, designing
machinery, essentially. But as I went through the
program, my interests changed. And I became, in my
junior and senior year, very interested in the
emerging area of automatic control. And so I was in
what they called the Honors Program, which was a
five-year program where you could do one thesis
and get two degrees. I was offered an opportunity
to work in one of the wartime laboratories, the
Dynamic Analysis and Control Laboratory. That
was at MIT. At MIT. It was, at the time, doing work on
guided missiles. And I joined a group that was
developing the electro-hydraulic controls for
the Meteor missile, which was the first.
autonomous
guided missile. There's another one thing that I
just finished doing. I was writing a history of
Johnson Space Center. Oh, really? Yeah, that was
really fascinating. I know what you're talking
about a little bit. Well, this facility had an
analog computer that was used for trajectory
analysis. It filled a whole floor in one of the
buildings That kind of computer will sit on our
desks today. Yeah, I remember incidentally
seeing the computer at Cape Canaveral before NASA
was established, I guess. I had a friend who worked
down there, and there were four buildings, I
believe, of computers, and they were shooting
that redstone off. And they had these paper tapes.
And my friend's job was to sit there and read the
tape and find out when a The vacuum tube, I guess
they were, burned out. He was an engineer reading
the paper, but that was an incredible array of
stuff. Well, anyway, so I worked in that lab, and I
was also in ROTC, so I had a military commitment. I
completed my master's degree, and I was planning
to go on active duty In the meantime, I had gotten
married, and I found out we were going to have a
child. So I decided maybe that wasn't a good idea.
So in order to avoid going on active duty at that
point in time, I talked to my supervisor, and he
said, why don't you take the doctoral exams? And so
I did, and it came out real well. So they offered me a
graduate assistantship,
I stayed on and completed a doctoral degree,
finishing in 1958.
Did you continue working on that dynamics
analysis plan? Yeah. And then for a while, for
about a year, actually it was prior to receiving my
doctorate, I was offered a teaching position and
taught in the control and design area for a year
while I was still a graduate student. I was a
graduate instructor.
Following that, I went on. You liked to teach.
Yeah, yeah. I went on active duty, and I was
stationed eventually at Aberdeen Proving
Grounds, where I worked on the effects of nuclear
weapons
developed some instrumentation and equipment.
Came back after that, was offered a faculty
position at MIT in mechanical engineering. So
what year is that, roughly, do you remember? That
was in 59.
And then I just kind of went through the standard up
through the ranks type of process.
That was a time when universities were trying to
get out of the military R&D business, and the
laboratory that I had been associated with was
essentially dismantled. And I changed my
emphasis area from missiles and that sort of thing
to transportation and industrial fluid power
control. was a participant in the studies that
were done by the then Commerce Department, which
led to the formation of the US Department of
Transportation.
Continued working for them in research areas like
high speed ground transportation,
magnetically. So you stayed primarily in
research. You hadn't gotten into administration
too much. No, I wasn't in administration. Then
there was an opportunity to go to the Department of
Transportation to work for the then Secretary
John Volpe as the first chief scientist in the
department. So I moved to Washington and did that
for two years. Learned a lot about politics and how
to get things done. in the political environment,
worked all across the agencies of the department.
And your title was what? Chief scientist.
And I got a couple of university programs going
that continued for more than a decade afterwards,
funding generic type research at universities.
Did you have any encounters along the way with
Texas A&M at that time? Yes. In fact, that comes
back to the question you asked me, how did I know
about Texas A&M. When I was doing the work to put
together this university program, I went all
around the country to the leading institutes in
The Texas Transportation Institute, which was
headed by Jack Keese at that time, was clearly one
of the stronger university-based
institutes of its kind, but with a very special
character. It was very much oriented toward
highway infrastructure, construction, highway
design, safety. So it was narrow in the sense that
it was just a a small piece of one mode of
transportation. And it was very, very applied.
There was essentially no basic research going on.
But yet it was very notable. And that was the first
time I had ever come to the A&M campus. So that was in
1971,
roughly. I knew Jack Keyes and Cubby Manning about
the time. They were in Little League with me. We
were coaching Little League or something. You
knew who those people were. So anyway, coming back
to the MIT situation, after DOT, I was there two
years. And then I came back to MIT with a lot of ideas
on what MIT should be doing in transportation.
worked on the establishment of the Center for
Transportation Studies at MIT. And then a year
later was asked to become head of the ME
department. So I took that over. It was kind of a low
spot in the history of the department, because the
enrollment was way down. They were talking about
maybe changing their name to something else. And
there had been a significant reduction in the size
of the faculty. So things were kind of at a low. And I
guess I was lucky or something, but I was able to
build the department back up and generate a lot of
new programs. I have some outstanding faculty. I
was in that job for eight years. And by the time I had
left, I had hired almost half of the faculty
members on my watch. It was partly due to some early
retirements, making open positions, and partly
due to the fact the department grew. Very, very.
Was MIT holding their enrollment pretty stable
during that time? The overall enrollment, yeah.
But there were a lot of shifts.
So anyway, I did that for eight years.
Then I was asked to come into the dean's office as
associate dean, which I did.
After I'd been in that position for a year, year and
a half, was when I was first approached by Texas
A&M.
I guess I didn't take it very seriously, but one
thing, there were almost no nationally visible
faculty members. When I went over the list of
faculty that was I think only a couple of faculty
members I'd ever heard of. And so it was not a very
visible college. But finally, the people here
were very persistent. And finally, I did. Who are
you dealing with, primarily? Well, it was Arthur
Hanson, who was the chancellor at that time, Frank
Vandiver. Gordon Eaton was the provost. And Jack
Flipsey, who was president of the Research
Foundation, was very instrumental in convincing
me. Is that right? He is one of the people that I did
know.
So I finally did come down, and I found it was a
pretty intriguing situation.
back and forth quite a bit. But in the end, as I
thought about it, I thought, well, I can stay at
MIT. I've got a real great position here. I'm doing
well. And I can make an incremental difference.
But if I came to a place like A&M with a resolve to say
I had to really be something, I could make a major
difference. And that was why I came and had a little
problem with my spouse. because she didn't even
want to come down and look. Oh, is that right? Yeah,
she said, Texas, that's tumbleweed and snakes.
Oh, that's a universal thing. Anything to do with
that. Finally, she said, okay, well, I'll go down,
but if I see one snake, just forget it. I hope you
call ahead and clear those things out, because
they are here. But she came down, and she... She
really took a shine to the place. They didn't see
his name. Found out there were, in fact, trees and
grass. They were always amazed. And then there was
a good opportunity for her in veterinary
medicine. So she,
at the time, had a couple of master's degrees and
was going to go on. If we'd stayed there, she would
have gone on at Harvard to get a doctorate. So we
came down. Oh, I had not realized you were
. So the first thing I did was I recruited Jack
Flipsey to come over and help me, which turned out
to be a very good move. And then kept Skip Fletcher
on as associate dean. He knew where all the bodies
were buried, and who'd done what to whom. So as
you know, we integrated the agencies in with the
College of Engineering. And I was dean and I was
vice chancellor with the agencies reporting to
me. There was a very destructive relationship at
that time between the engineering experiment
station and the College of Engineering. And to fix
that, I had myself appointed. I appointed myself
as director of the experiment station. And we went
about integrating the faculty. We did away. There
was a lot of duplication of centers. There'd be a
center in TEAS, and there'd be another activity in
the college. And they were fighting each other
over the budget. We closed a number of those
centers. And others, like the computer center
that was in Tees, we gave to computer science.
It was kind of a stressful time. Yeah, I can
imagine. What did you see as your, was it more of an
administrative, structural problem or mission
that you felt you had here? Or what was your total
sense of the problem? motive or mission when you
arrived? What was the mission was to develop the
engineering program, the college and three
agencies, into a first-rate, high-quality,
nationally visible program that would attract
top-quality students, produce top-quality
graduates, to strengthen the graduate programs
in particular, to increase the level of sponsored
research, and to generally develop the program.
So the first step was basically this structural
integration of the various components that would
form the College of Engineering. Well, form the
engineering program. And what it did,
essentially, it created a situation where the
faculty Instead of having two bosses who were
fighting with each other, we had one boss, and that
was their department head. The department head
was the department head in the college, but the
same person was the division head for research and
teas. And then we set up some incentives so that the
indirect cost from research programs was used to
feed back and further strengthen the departments
and the programs. And that worked tremendously
well. And most of those costs been retained in the
what? In the college or in the extension? In the
previous situation, the director of the
experiment station had all those monies And used
them to lodge yes and to reward friends rather than
performers.
So this is just a direct plow back, in effect, to the
department, depending on the volume of activity
generated by that department. That's right. It's
what in control we call a positive feedback loop.
The other thing that we did was we established
clear set of criteria for promotion, tenure, and
appointment, and made sure that all the faculty
knew about it. We strengthened the review
process, the tenure process.
And the other thing that I did when I first came here
was establish a a development activity,
fundraising activity.
Who headed that? Well, Kyle Jedeke is the person.
He's still there. He's a chemical engineer, has an
MBA. And I made a deal with the Development
Foundation where we pay half the salary and they
pay half the salary. But I got to hire the
individual. And he physically located an
engineering.
And that worked very well. Raised a lot of money. A
lot of chairs and a lot of professorships.
Were you, I suppose there were a lot of new
recruiting going on. Oh, yes. Soon. There was. Did
you sort of personally participate in a lot of
that? Oh, yes. I know at one level you had. What
about your relation as the deans, let's say, with
the other structures and deans in the university?
I think it was pretty good. We established
these divisions in any other college that wanted
it so they could participate. I think the one that
gets the prize for utilizing that best is liberal
arts. Dan Fallon was just... When he came here,
there was hardly 25 cents in research money. And he
very astutely used the T's money to leverage the
research activity of liberal arts. In fact, even
the concept of his paid, funded research was not
very well known in the college of liberal arts.
So that's kind of the situation, I guess. How about
support from the administration, president, and
so forth? Well, we had, the place had, at least had a
little money left, and they did make a commitment
of around $13 million in development money over a
period of about five years. And, yeah, I've always
had good relationships
with the administration. Every now and then
there's a problem that usually has to do with
money, but overall I think the college had good
relations with the other colleges and with the
administration.
Were there any new directions you were trying to
Well, one thing I could tell you by way of
impressions when I first came on the job, I got all
the department heads together and tried to tell
them a little bit about my style and I expected
initiative from them.
It was a real quiet meeting. Nobody wanted to say
anything.
And so finally I said, well, what do you folks want
to do? What are your ideas? And one of them finally
piped up and said, well, Dr. Richardson, just tell
us what you want us to do. We'll do it. That was the
Aggie way. That's right. I was just
flabbergasted. Because where I come from, it's
all prima donnas.
There were some very strong walls between
departments. There were departments that would
say to a faculty member, I don't want you working on
this project with, like if you're in mechanical, I
don't want you working on a project in civil
engineering. Your job is to be working here in this
department.
I remember Dr. Calhoun used to talk about the walls
of this university. That took quite a while. It
essentially took a new set of department heads,
many of them brought in from outside, to change
that. I think today there's a pretty permeable.
You would have done a lot, because my perception is
that the College of Engineering is the strongest
College of the University. And it was the oldest,
you might say, most deeply established and
entrenched. And there hadn't, in fact, been a lot
of inbred development here. And so I'm sure it was a
pretty static world that you would imagine. What
about the, I guess let's move on to the
chancellorship and so forth. What's happening in
terms of the University? period of temporary
insanity there where
I decided that I'd be receptive to taking on this
job.
The A&M system until fairly recent years
has not been what I would call a system. In the first
place, for many years, as you know, It was really
dominated by Texas A&M University. And so you had
this situation where sometimes the chancellor
would be the president, or the president would be
the chancellor. And a lot of conflict as to who was
running things. And strong personalities who
felt strongly that they should be running it
instead of having a kind of a... I remember I was so
impressed when Tom Harrington said, you know what
we really should have done long ago is move the
systems headquarters to Dallas. That's strange
coming from an Aggie. But he had a point, I think,
and the point was that this conflict might have
been better alleviated. Excuse me. In 1989, when
we were given these four new institutions.
Which were? Okay, which were Laredo State
University in Laredo, Texas A&I University in
Kingsville, Corpus Christi State University,
Corpus Christi, and West Texas State University
in Canyon. and Amarillo. Laredo and Corpus
Christi were and still are upper division. They
did not have freshman sophomores. Laredo still
does not have its own campus. Its base is leased
from Laredo Junior College. And West Texas, of
course, was in difficulty. Their enrollment was
down. Excuse me, was this acquisition, would you
say, at least in part at the initiative of the A&M
Regents, or what was the attitude there? But I know
there were conflicts. I would say it was more a
passive act. Let me answer it this way. It was not a
situation where the A&M system had an overall
long-range strategy. and saw these institutions
as important components that, if they could be
acquired, would help to promote that long-term
strategy. There was no long-term strategy for the
system. In fact, what the system mostly did was,
what we call, ensure fiduciary integrity. manage
the books, carry out audit functions, invest
money for the common good, manage our share of the
permanent university fund and the AUF. And
together with the regents, hire and fire
presidents and agency directors.
Beginning... really with Perry Atkinson's
administration, that there began to be some
long-range thinking about what the A&M system
should be and what its mission should be in the
state and what areas should it try to emphasize and
de-emphasize.
And I think Perry Atkinson had some very good
long-range visions as to what the system might
become in the future. I think felt very strongly
that the emphasis should really be in engineering
and agriculture because that's the place where
the system has a good deal of strength. Of course,
those universities that came into the system
at that time did not add a lot to those strengths,
even though there was some agriculture programs.
A&I has a respectable engineering program. You
wouldn't say that it had much effect on the overall
activity. So there was a lot of soul-searching, I
think, out of the board during the time Perry was
chancellor. A study was done, I guess about four
years ago, was the year before Perry announced he
was going to step down, by McKenzie and Company,
where they looked at
some indicators for higher education throughout
Texas and compared compared those indicators
with what was going on nationally and looked at
various attributes of particularly the
universities that were in the system at that time,
eight of them, and tried to characterize them.
Were they high engineering, high agriculture,
low engineering, low agriculture, no
engineering, no agriculture? and what the
quality was as indicated by the admissions SAT
scores of entering students, kind of came to the
conclusion that a number of these universities
didn't really fit our system. And I think there was
some sentiment at that time that the study was done
in part to defend the system against other
institutions being given to us. So the idea was try
to come up with some rationale so that if
some institution, Sol Ross or whatever, decides
they want to join, you can say, yeah, that makes
sense, ignore it. No, it doesn't. Well, that study
was finished. And then Perry announced he was
going and stepped down. So everything was kind of
put on hold pending the arrival of the new
chancellor. As part of that process, though,
there had been established a committee, a regent
committee on strategic planning and long-range
goals and strategic planning headed by Raul
Fernandez. So the mechanism was in place. And when
Bill Mobley was here with Perry, he had initiated a
comprehensive strategic planning process for
the whole system. And there had been one
iteration. So that was in place.
When I came over here, one of the first questions
that I tried to deal with is just that. What is the
A&M system anyway? What do we want it to be? What's
its mission in the state as compared with other
systems? Particularly, how is it different from
the UT system in terms of the missions and goals?
And we had a whole series of meetings with the
Regents Planning Committee, and with our CEOs,
agency directors, and presidents on that issue.
The outcome of that was a short statement of what
the A&M system is, besides being a collection of 15
institutions. Do you have that somewhere? Yes, I
do. We also have a vision statement that It
expresses what some of our values are, things like
being a premier source of
education, research, and new technology
in the state. One question that I guess needs to be
asked somewhere along here is, are you
cooperating at this point With University of
Texas, is there any collusion in the sense of joint
planning and development? I wouldn't say there
was joint planning, particularly. We try to
collaborate pretty closely in the legislative
session. Which is really relevant to new
development, too. It is. But Cunningham and I at
Shilkin Lawless have been kind of a coalition of
the big dogs, if you will. And we've met frequently
and coordinated different kinds of activities.
And that collaboration developed in part because
of, whatever they were, the financial tensions on
the systems and higher education generally in
Texas. Because I know every school wanted to
re-enact itself to something to get a portion of
the available funds, et cetera, et cetera. And we
have some collaborative research programs
between UT and A&M. In engineering, for instance,
the Offshore Technology Center, NTS,
the Southwestern University Transportation
Research Center, NTTI. It's a collaboration
between A&M and UT Austin. And there are others.
There's a space grant consortium.
There's always a certain amount of ego that gets
into those things, that gets in the way. Let me ask
this. How have the regents reacted to this
collaboration? Very positive. I guess
I don't want to keep you too much longer, Dr.
Richardson. What have been your greatest, you
might say, difficulties, problems, or issues as
chancellor of the system? And where do you see the
system
heading?
Of course, a uniform difficult challenge in these
times is the financial one. So dealing with the
legislature in particular, the state
legislature, and trying to be sure that we get our
share of the funding, that is one of the most
difficult challenges.
What about you? I think in terms of new directions,
I see my job, a lot of my job is to encourage
collaboration and synergy among these 15
institutions that we have. So that each president
or CEO has a sense of dual citizenship. One, of
course, is as the leader in their particular unit,
whether it's Texas A&M University or it's the Ag
Extension Service, but also to feel a sense of
citizenship in the system as a whole. So that while
they need to look inward and look to the support of
their units and the growth and development of
their units, they also have to look upward and
outward with a responsibility to help the system
as a whole be more and do more than the collection of
the individual parts can. We're in a very enviable
position in a lot of ways because of the presence of
these statewide research and service agencies in
engineering and agriculture. They provide, in a
lot of ways, the web or the network that encourages
institutions to work together.
Yeah, that's in the Extension Experiment Station
tradition, I guess. Yes. So it's really .
I think that
one issue for the future is the relationship of the
system to industry.
particularly Texas industry, but not limited to
that.
In engineering, the way things have developed,
there are many, many very strong collaborative
relationships now. Programs where there will be a
large number of small companies that come
together with people from
faculty and students, or major industries, like
the major oil company. Every major oil company
supports the Offshore Technology Center.
I know I was always struck by the interaction
between the academia side of things and the NASA
side of things. It was just an open door going back
and forth. Yeah.
These kinds of relationships don't exist so much,
though, other areas like some aspects at least of
the marine area and agriculture in particular.
And so one of my goals and one of the goals that I've
asked Ed Hila to adopt in his new position as the
leader of agriculture in the system is to begin to
foster and develop similar kind of relationships
with industries that have an interest in
agriculture and the life sciences. And the first
example of that is the
Center for Vegetable and Crop Improvement headed
by Leonard Pike,
which now has an industry consortium that's
working with which is sort of a vertically
integrated The Saudi each has shippers and
suppliers and growers and food processors and
what not.